## Games of Chance ##

What is the maximum amount you would be willing to pay to play each of the
following games:

1. We are going to flip a fair coin. Heads, you win $1. Tails, you win
   nothing.
2. We are going to roll two 6-sided dice. If the sum is > 9.5, you win $6. If the
   sum < 9.5, you pay $0.30

The only right answers are:

1. $0.50
2. $0.75

Why?

### Flipping a Coin ###

"Heads" and "tails" are equally probable outcomes. Each has a 50% chance of occuring. You have a 50% chance of winning $1.00 and a 50% chance of winning nothing. The expected value (EV) of a single instance of this game is $.50.

![Coin Toss: Expected Value](images/pricing_cointoss-ev.jpg)

Another way of saying that is that there are 2 possible future states of the world, "coin shows heads" and "coin shows tales", each with a 50% probability.

![Coin Toss: Tree](images/pricing_cointoss-tree.jpg)

Before the coin toss occurs, you are at a state of the world described by
the left node, labelled "pre-flip". This node is connected by lines to two
possible future states of the world: "heads" or "tails". Each of these lines
represents a path that _can_ occur, but won't _necessarily_ occur.

The act of flipping the coin causes the description of the world to traverse
either the upper path or the lower path, ending in one of the nodes to the
right, and realizing a certain, specific, future state of the world ("heads"
or tails").

In a single iteration of the game, only one of these events will actually
occur. The player will either win $1 or $0.

A risk neutral (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_neutral) agent should be
willing to pay any amount up to $.50, the price at which there would be no
bias towards gain or loss if this game was repeatedly played for eternity.

### Rolling Dice ###

If 2 die are rolled, what are the possible outcomes? (And which ones add up
to sums > 9.5?)

As in the fair coin example, let's take the sum of the likelihood of each individual
outcome times the payout if that outcome should occur.

![Rolling Dice: Tree](images/pricing_rollingdice-tree.jpg)

![Rolling Dice: Expected Value](images/pricing_rollingdice-ev.jpg)

= $ .75

This game is worth up to $.75 for a risk neutral player.

## Option Prices As Expected Value ##

Exploring possible random walks of a stock creates a probability
distribution of possible "terminal" stock prices at a future snapshot in
time, say, 5 days from today.

Imagine ACME stock, which is trading $50 right now. At each time step (1 day
in this example, but can be any arbitrary duration), the stock can either
move up $1 or down $1:

![Possible 5-day price paths](images/pricing_possiblepaths.jpg)

Tracking all possible paths leads to this expiration date ACME price
probability distribution:

![ACME price distribution](images/pricing_ACMEterminaldistribution.jpg)

An option has a payout at each of those terminal nodes. As a example we'll
use the ACME 5-day 51 call (the call option expiring in 5 days which gives
the owner the right to buy ACME stock for the price of $51):

![ACME 51 call payouts](images/pricing_ACME51call.jpg)

The option value is the sum of the products of the probability and the
payout at each possible outcome:

![Value of the ACME 51 call](images/pricing_ACME51callvalue.jpg)

The ACME 51 call has an expected value at expiration of 0.4375. The value
today is the present value of that future expected value.

### Recap ###

Another way to state this is that the option value is the present value of
the scalar product of the underlying's probability distribution function at
expiration time and the expiration payout diagram:

__Option Value = Present Value of (

![Underlying's Terminal PDF](images/random_walks_5.jpg)

.

![ACME 51 call payouts](images/pricing_ACME51call.jpg)

)__

Since the call payout is 0 below the strike, we're only concerned with the
probability function for underlying values greater than the option strike.

For puts, we only need to evaluate underlying values less than the option
strike.

More volatile names and longer expirations have wider distributions, therefore the positive payout tail increases, and therefore increases the total option value. Only one of those paths will be actualized, so your estimate will never be "right", but over an infinite number of plays, you'll expect to break even

Pros: This is entirely independent of any particular pricing model. You just need to have an opinion about the terminal price distribution, and you can draw any arbitrary terminal price probability distribution. (1)

Cons: This doesn't tell you anything about how to capture the value of the option reliably.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Footnotes

(1) _In practice, the starting point for discussions about an appropriate distribution describe an idealized Black-Scholes "universe".

You can think of this idealized market in the same way that you think of idealized physics universe assumptions where every object is a point mass, pulleys are frictionless, transfer of energy is efficient, etc. Is it perfect, no. Is it good enough to start, yep._

