# Random Walks #

Before we discuss option valuation, we have to touch on the behavior of the underlying stock.

Option value is based on the behavior of the option's underlying stock. More
specifically, options have value because there is uncertainty in the future
price of a stock and options guarantee the bearer certainty in an otherwise
uncertain future.


We can't know the exact path that a stock's price will take in the
future. Instead, we characterize the stock's behavior and use that to
describe all the _possible_ future states of the stock.

## Example ##

AAPL stock settled today, Nov 20 2012 at 560.91/share.
Throughout the course of the day tomorrow, indepent market participants will
buy and sell shares of AAPL, causing the price to move up and down,
seemingly at random.

At each moment in the day, the next price that prints on the AAPL ticker may
be either higher or lower than the current price -- this is unpredictable
(and not necessarily equally probable)

It's useful to imagine the stock price like a ball running through a series
of pins:

![A ball running through pins mimics price behavior](images/randomwalks_1.png)

This uncertain, stochastic price movement over time is referred to as a "random walk".

While you don't know what price AAPL will settle tomorrow, you might have a
guess that some settlement prices are more likely than others.

Given, for example, the fact that AAPL has closed between 550 and 575 for
the last 10 days, you might say it is highly improbable for AAPL to close
between 0 and 100 tomorrow. It is highly probable that AAPL will close
between 500 and 650 per share. It's also improbable that AAPL will close
between $10,000 and $10,100 per share.

Starting with $100 wide buckets, we can create a histogram of what might be
a reasonable guess for where AAPL settles tomorrow.

![100-wide bucket histogram of AAPL 1-day price distribution](images/random_walks_2.jpg)

Now repeat this exercise for increasingly small buckets to get a continuous distribution of infinitely small buckets (or at least penny sized).

![25-wide bucket histogram of AAPL 1-day price distribution](images/random_walks_3.jpg)

![5-wide bucket histogram of AAPL 1-day price distribution](images/random_walks_4.jpg)

![Continuous function of AAPL 1-day price distribution](images/random_walks_5.jpg)

This is what you think AAPL will settle tomorrow, described as a
__probability density function___ of possible prices for a specific instant
in time in the future.

Now imagine repeating this process for every time step between now and the
expiration.  The further away the end date is, the more pins the ball will
run through, increasing the probability of drifting further from the current price.

An expected 3 month price distribution might look like:

![AAPL 3-mo price distribution](images/random_walks_6.jpg)

Stocks that move more (higher volatility) and have longer times to expiration generate wider probability distributions. Stocks that move less (lower volatility) and shorter times will result in narrower probability distributions.

![Terminal distributions for constant vol/varying time](images/random_walks_7.jpg)

![Terminal distributions for varying vol/constant time](images/random_walks_8.jpg)

There are many different models for how a stock price "walks". For the
purposes of developing intuitions about where options get value, they're not
particularly important. The important thing to note is that there is
uncertainty in future price that is described as a probability distribution
of possible stock prices at a specific expiration date.


